docs/plugins/deezer.rst, before:

Deezer Plugin
=============

The ``deezer`` plugin provides metadata matches for the importer using the
Deezer_ Album_ and Track_ APIs.

.. _album: https://developers.deezer.com/api/album

.. _deezer: https://www.deezer.com

.. _track: https://developers.deezer.com/api/track

Basic Usage
-----------

First, enable the ``deezer`` plugin (see :ref:`using-plugins`).

You can enter the URL for an album or song on Deezer at the ``enter Id`` prompt
during import:

::

    Enter search, enter Id, aBort, eDit, edit Candidates, plaY? i
    Enter release ID: https://www.deezer.com/en/album/572261

Configuration
-------------

This plugin can be configured like other metadata source plugins as described in
:ref:`metadata-source-plugin-configuration`.

Default
~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

    deezer:
        data_source_mismatch_penalty: 0.5
        search_limit: 5
        search_query_ascii: no

- **search_query_ascii**: If set to ``yes``, the search query will be converted
  to ASCII before being sent to Deezer. Converting searches to ASCII can enhance
  search results in some cases, but in general, it is not recommended. For
  instance ``artist:deadmau5 album:4×4`` will be converted to ``artist:deadmau5
  album:4x4`` (notice ``×!=x``). Default: ``no``.

The ``deezer`` plugin provides an additional command ``deezerupdate`` to update
the ``rank`` information from Deezer. The ``rank`` (ranges from 0 to 1M) is a
global indicator of a song's popularity on Deezer that is updated daily based on
streams. The higher the ``rank``, the more popular the track is.

Commit message:

Convert autotagger plugin docs to use conf role

docs/plugins/deezer.rst, after:

Deezer Plugin
=============

The ``deezer`` plugin provides metadata matches for the importer using the
Deezer_ Album_ and Track_ APIs.

.. _album: https://developers.deezer.com/api/album

.. _deezer: https://www.deezer.com

.. _track: https://developers.deezer.com/api/track

Basic Usage
-----------

First, enable the ``deezer`` plugin (see :ref:`using-plugins`).

You can enter the URL for an album or song on Deezer at the ``enter Id`` prompt
during import:

::

    Enter search, enter Id, aBort, eDit, edit Candidates, plaY? i
    Enter release ID: https://www.deezer.com/en/album/572261

Configuration
-------------

This plugin can be configured like other metadata source plugins as described in
:ref:`metadata-source-plugin-configuration`.

Default
~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

    deezer:
        search_query_ascii: no
        data_source_mismatch_penalty: 0.5
        search_limit: 5

.. conf:: search_query_ascii
    :default: no

    If enabled, the search query will be converted to ASCII before being sent to
    Deezer. Converting searches to ASCII can enhance search results in some cases,
    but in general, it is not recommended. For instance, ``artist:deadmau5
    album:4×4`` will be converted to ``artist:deadmau5 album:4x4`` (notice
    ``×!=x``).

.. include:: ./shared_metadata_source_config.rst

Commands
--------

The ``deezer`` plugin provides an additional command ``deezerupdate`` to update
the ``rank`` information from Deezer. The ``rank`` (ranges from 0 to 1M) is a
global indicator of a song's popularity on Deezer that is updated daily based on
streams. The higher the ``rank``, the more popular the track is.
