docs/plugins/mbcollection.rst, before:

MusicBrainz Collection Plugin
=============================

The ``mbcollection`` plugin lets you submit your catalog to MusicBrainz to
maintain your `music collection`_ list there.

.. _music collection: https://musicbrainz.org/doc/Collections

To begin, just enable the ``mbcollection`` plugin in your configuration (see
:ref:`using-plugins`). Then, add your MusicBrainz username and password to your
:doc:`configuration file </reference/config>` under a ``musicbrainz`` section:

::

    musicbrainz:
        user: you
        pass: seekrit

Then, use the ``beet mbupdate`` command to send your albums to MusicBrainz. The
command automatically adds all of your albums to the first collection it finds.
If you don't have a MusicBrainz collection yet, you may need to add one to your
profile first.

The command has one command-line option:

- To remove albums from the collection which are no longer present in the beets
  database, use the ``-r`` (``--remove``) flag.

Configuration
-------------

To configure the plugin, make a ``mbcollection:`` section in your configuration
file. There is one option available:

- **auto**: Automatically amend your MusicBrainz collection whenever you import
  a new album. Default: ``no``.
- **collection**: The MBID of which MusicBrainz collection to update. Default:
  ``None``.
- **remove**: Remove albums from collections which are no longer present in the
  beets database. Default: ``no``.

Commit message:

Update docs to indicate the shared musicbrainz options

docs/plugins/mbcollection.rst, after:

MusicBrainz Collection Plugin
=============================

The ``mbcollection`` plugin lets you submit your catalog to MusicBrainz to
maintain your `music collection`_ list there.

.. _music collection: https://musicbrainz.org/doc/Collections

To begin, just enable the ``mbcollection`` plugin in your configuration (see
:ref:`using-plugins`). Then, add your MusicBrainz username and password to your
:doc:`configuration file </reference/config>` under a ``musicbrainz`` section:

::

    musicbrainz:
        user: you
        pass: seekrit

Other ``musicbrainz`` options may be set to modify the connection to MusicBrainz
(see :ref:`musicbrainz-shared-options`).

Then, use the ``beet mbupdate`` command to send your albums to MusicBrainz. The
command automatically adds all of your albums to the first collection it finds.
If you don't have a MusicBrainz collection yet, you may need to add one to your
profile first.

The command has one command-line option:

- To remove albums from the collection which are no longer present in the beets
  database, use the ``-r`` (``--remove``) flag.

Configuration
-------------

To configure the plugin, make a ``mbcollection:`` section in your configuration
file. There is one option available:

- **auto**: Automatically amend your MusicBrainz collection whenever you import
  a new album. Default: ``no``.
- **collection**: The MBID of which MusicBrainz collection to update. Default:
  ``None``.
- **remove**: Remove albums from collections which are no longer present in the
  beets database. Default: ``no``.
