docs/plugins/musicbrainz.rst, before:

MusicBrainz Plugin
==================

The ``musicbrainz`` plugin extends the autotagger's search capabilities to
include matches from the MusicBrainz_ database.

.. _musicbrainz: https://musicbrainz.org/

Installation
------------

To use the ``musicbrainz`` plugin, enable it in your configuration (see
:ref:`using-plugins`)

.. _musicbrainz-config:

Configuration
-------------

Default
~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

    musicbrainz:
        host: musicbrainz.org
        https: no
        ratelimit: 1
        ratelimit_interval: 1.0
        searchlimit: 5
        extra_tags: []
        genres: no
        external_ids:
            discogs: no
            bandcamp: no
            spotify: no
            deezer: no
            beatport: no
            tidal: no

You can instruct beets to use `your own MusicBrainz database
<https://musicbrainz.org/doc/MusicBrainz_Server/Setup>`__ instead of the

`main server`_. Use the ``host``, ``https`` and ``ratelimit`` options under a
``musicbrainz:`` header, like so

.. code-block:: yaml

    musicbrainz:
        host: localhost:5000
        https: no
        ratelimit: 100

The ``host`` key, of course, controls the Web server hostname (and port,
optionally) that will be contacted by beets (default: musicbrainz.org). The
``https`` key makes the client use HTTPS instead of HTTP. This setting applies
only to custom servers. The official MusicBrainz server always uses HTTPS.
(Default: no.) The server must have search indices enabled (see `Building search
indexes`_).

The ``ratelimit`` option, an integer, controls the number of Web service
requests per second (default: 1). **Do not change the rate limit setting** if
you're using the main MusicBrainz server---on this public server, you're
limited_ to one request per second.

.. _building search indexes: https://musicbrainz.org/doc/Development/Search_server_setup

.. _limited: https://musicbrainz.org/doc/XML_Web_Service/Rate_Limiting

.. _main server: https://musicbrainz.org/

.. _musicbrainz.enabled:

enabled
+++++++

.. deprecated:: 2.3 Add ``musicbrainz`` to the ``plugins`` list instead.

This option allows you to disable using MusicBrainz as a metadata source. This
applies if you use plugins that fetch data from alternative sources and should
make the import process quicker.

Default: ``yes``.

.. _searchlimit:

searchlimit
+++++++++++

The number of matches returned when sending search queries to the MusicBrainz
server.

Default: ``5``.

.. _extra_tags:

extra_tags
++++++++++

By default, beets will use only the artist, album, and track count to query
MusicBrainz. Additional tags to be queried can be supplied with the
``extra_tags`` setting. For example

.. code-block:: yaml

    musicbrainz:
        extra_tags: [barcode, catalognum, country, label, media, year]

This setting should improve the autotagger results if the metadata with the
given tags match the metadata returned by MusicBrainz.

Note that the only tags supported by this setting are the ones listed in the
above example.

Default: ``[]``

.. _genres:

genres
++++++

Use MusicBrainz genre tags to populate (and replace if it's already set) the
``genre`` tag. This will make it a list of all the genres tagged for the release
and the release-group on MusicBrainz, separated by "; " and sorted by the total
number of votes. Default: ``no``

.. _musicbrainz.external_ids:

external_ids
++++++++++++

Set any of the ``external_ids`` options to ``yes`` to enable the MusicBrainz
importer to look for links to related metadata sources. If such a link is
available the release ID will be extracted from the URL provided and imported to
the beets library

.. code-block:: yaml

    musicbrainz:
        external_ids:
            discogs: yes
            spotify: yes
            bandcamp: yes
            beatport: yes
            deezer: yes
            tidal: yes

The library fields of the corresponding :ref:`autotagger_extensions` are used to
save the data (``discogs_albumid``, ``bandcamp_album_id``, ``spotify_album_id``,
``beatport_album_id``, ``deezer_album_id``, ``tidal_album_id``). On re-imports
existing data will be overwritten.

The default of all options is ``no``.

Commit message:

Update docs to indicate the shared musicbrainz options

docs/plugins/musicbrainz.rst, after:

MusicBrainz Plugin
==================

The ``musicbrainz`` plugin extends the autotagger's search capabilities to
include matches from the MusicBrainz_ database.

.. _musicbrainz: https://musicbrainz.org/

Installation
------------

To use the ``musicbrainz`` plugin, enable it in your configuration (see
:ref:`using-plugins`)

.. _musicbrainz-config:

Configuration
-------------

Default
~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

    musicbrainz:
        host: musicbrainz.org
        https: no
        ratelimit: 1
        ratelimit_interval: 1.0
        searchlimit: 5
        extra_tags: []
        genres: no
        external_ids:
            discogs: no
            bandcamp: no
            spotify: no
            deezer: no
            beatport: no
            tidal: no

You can instruct beets to use `your own MusicBrainz database
<https://musicbrainz.org/doc/MusicBrainz_Server/Setup>`__ instead of the

`main server`_. Use the ``host``, ``https`` and ``ratelimit`` options under a
``musicbrainz:`` header, like so

.. code-block:: yaml

    musicbrainz:
        host: localhost:5000
        https: no
        ratelimit: 100

The ``host`` key, of course, controls the Web server hostname (and port,
optionally) that will be contacted by beets (default: musicbrainz.org). The
``https`` key makes the client use HTTPS instead of HTTP. This setting applies
only to custom servers. The official MusicBrainz server always uses HTTPS.
(Default: no.) The server must have search indices enabled (see `Building search
indexes`_).

The ``ratelimit`` and ``ratelimit_interval`` options, respectively an integer
and a decimal number, control the number of Web service requests per interval of
time (default: 1 request per second). **Do not change the rate limit setting**
if you're using the main MusicBrainz server---on this public server, you're
limited_ to one request per second.

.. _musicbrainz-shared-options:

Shared options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As other plugins may send requests to the MusicBrainz API, the following
``musicbrainz`` options will also modify the other plugins' connection to
MusicBrainz, even if the ``musicbrainz`` plugin is disabled:

- ``host``
- ``https``
- ``ratelimit``
- ``ratelimit_interval``
- ``user``
- ``pass``

.. _building search indexes: https://musicbrainz.org/doc/Development/Search_server_setup

.. _limited: https://musicbrainz.org/doc/XML_Web_Service/Rate_Limiting

.. _main server: https://musicbrainz.org/

.. _musicbrainz.enabled:

enabled
+++++++

.. deprecated:: 2.3 Add ``musicbrainz`` to the ``plugins`` list instead.

This option allows you to disable using MusicBrainz as a metadata source. This
applies if you use plugins that fetch data from alternative sources and should
make the import process quicker.

Default: ``yes``.

.. _searchlimit:

searchlimit
+++++++++++

The number of matches returned when sending search queries to the MusicBrainz
server.

Default: ``5``.

.. _extra_tags:

extra_tags
++++++++++

By default, beets will use only the artist, album, and track count to query
MusicBrainz. Additional tags to be queried can be supplied with the
``extra_tags`` setting. For example

.. code-block:: yaml

    musicbrainz:
        extra_tags: [barcode, catalognum, country, label, media, year]

This setting should improve the autotagger results if the metadata with the
given tags match the metadata returned by MusicBrainz.

Note that the only tags supported by this setting are the ones listed in the
above example.

Default: ``[]``

.. _genres:

genres
++++++

Use MusicBrainz genre tags to populate (and replace if it's already set) the
``genre`` tag. This will make it a list of all the genres tagged for the release
and the release-group on MusicBrainz, separated by "; " and sorted by the total
number of votes. Default: ``no``

.. _musicbrainz.external_ids:

external_ids
++++++++++++

Set any of the ``external_ids`` options to ``yes`` to enable the MusicBrainz
importer to look for links to related metadata sources. If such a link is
available the release ID will be extracted from the URL provided and imported to
the beets library

.. code-block:: yaml

    musicbrainz:
        external_ids:
            discogs: yes
            spotify: yes
            bandcamp: yes
            beatport: yes
            deezer: yes
            tidal: yes

The library fields of the corresponding :ref:`autotagger_extensions` are used to
save the data (``discogs_albumid``, ``bandcamp_album_id``, ``spotify_album_id``,
``beatport_album_id``, ``deezer_album_id``, ``tidal_album_id``). On re-imports
existing data will be overwritten.

The default of all options is ``no``.
