docs/plugins/replaygain.rst, before:

ReplayGain Plugin
=================

This plugin adds support for ReplayGain_, a technique for normalizing audio
playback levels.

.. _replaygain: https://wiki.hydrogenaudio.org/index.php?title=ReplayGain

Installation
------------

This plugin can use one of many backends to compute the ReplayGain values:
GStreamer, mp3gain (and its cousin, aacgain), Python Audio Tools or ffmpeg.
ffmpeg and mp3gain can be easier to install. mp3gain supports less audio formats
than the other backend.

Once installed, this plugin analyzes all files during the import process. This
can be a slow process; to instead analyze after the fact, disable automatic
analysis and use the ``beet replaygain`` command (see below).

To speed up analysis with some of the available backends, this plugin processes
tracks or albums (when using the ``-a`` option) in parallel. By default, a
single thread is used per logical core of your CPU.

GStreamer
~~~~~~~~~

To use GStreamer_ for ReplayGain analysis, you will of course need to install
GStreamer and plugins for compatibility with your audio files. You will need at
least GStreamer 1.0 and `PyGObject 3.x`_ (a.k.a. ``python-gi``).

.. _gstreamer: https://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/

.. _pygobject 3.x: https://pygobject.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

Then, install ``beets`` with ``replaygain`` extra which installs ``GStreamer``
bindings for Python

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install "beets[replaygain]"

Lastly, enable the ``replaygain`` plugin in your configuration (see
:ref:`using-plugins`) and specify the GStreamer backend by adding this to your
configuration file:

::

    replaygain:
        backend: gstreamer

The GStreamer backend does not support parallel analysis.

mp3gain and aacgain
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to use this backend, you will need to install the mp3gain_ command-line
tool or the aacgain_ fork thereof. Here are some hints:

- On Mac OS X, you can use Homebrew_. Type ``brew install aacgain``.
- On Linux, mp3gain_ is probably in your repositories. On Debian or Ubuntu, for
  example, you can run ``apt-get install mp3gain``.
- On Windows, download and install the original mp3gain_.

.. _aacgain: https://aacgain.altosdesign.com

.. _homebrew: https://brew.sh

.. _mp3gain: http://mp3gain.sourceforge.net/download.php

Then, enable the plugin (see :ref:`using-plugins`) and specify the "command"
backend in your configuration file:

::

    replaygain:
        backend: command

If beets doesn't automatically find the ``mp3gain`` or ``aacgain`` executable,
you can configure the path explicitly like so:

::

    replaygain:
        command: /Applications/MacMP3Gain.app/Contents/Resources/aacgain

Python Audio Tools
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This backend uses the `Python Audio Tools`_ package to compute ReplayGain for a
range of different file formats. The package is not available via PyPI; it must
be installed manually (only versions preceding 3.x are compatible).

On OS X, most of the dependencies can be installed with Homebrew_:

::

    brew install mpg123 mp3gain vorbisgain faad2 libvorbis

The Python Audio Tools backend does not support parallel analysis.

.. _python audio tools: http://audiotools.sourceforge.net

ffmpeg
~~~~~~

This backend uses ffmpeg to calculate EBU R128 gain values. To use it, install
the ffmpeg_ command-line tool and select the ``ffmpeg`` backend in your config
file.

.. _ffmpeg: https://ffmpeg.org

Configuration
-------------

To configure the plugin, make a ``replaygain:`` section in your configuration
file. The available options are:

- **auto**: Enable ReplayGain analysis during import. Default: ``yes``.
- **threads**: The number of parallel threads to run the analysis in. Overridden
  by ``--threads`` at the command line. Default: # of logical CPU cores
- **parallel_on_import**: Whether to enable parallel analysis during import. As
  of now this ReplayGain data is not written to files properly, so this option
  is disabled by default. If you wish to enable it, remember to run ``beet
  write`` after importing to actually write to the imported files. Default:
  ``no``
- **backend**: The analysis backend; either ``gstreamer``, ``command``,
  ``audiotools`` or ``ffmpeg``. Default: ``command``.
- **overwrite**: On import, re-analyze files that already have ReplayGain tags.
  Note that, for historical reasons, the name of this option is somewhat
  unfortunate: It does not decide whether tags are written to the files (which
  is controlled by the :ref:`import.write <config-import-write>` option).
  Default: ``no``.
- **targetlevel**: A number of decibels for the target loudness level for files
  using ``REPLAYGAIN_`` tags. Default: ``89``.
- **r128_targetlevel**: The target loudness level in decibels (i.e. ``<loudness
  in LUFS> + 107``) for files using ``R128_`` tags. Default: 84 (Use ``83`` for
  ATSC A/85, ``84`` for EBU R128 or ``89`` for ReplayGain 2.0.)
- **r128**: A space separated list of formats that will use ``R128_`` tags with
  integer values instead of the common ``REPLAYGAIN_`` tags with floating point
  values. Requires the "ffmpeg" backend. Default: ``Opus``.
- **per_disc**: Calculate album ReplayGain on disc level instead of album level.
  Default: ``no``

These options only work with the "command" backend:

- **command**: The path to the ``mp3gain`` or ``aacgain`` executable (if beets
  cannot find it by itself). For example:
  ``/Applications/MacMP3Gain.app/Contents/Resources/aacgain``. Default: Search
  in your ``$PATH``.
- **noclip**: Reduce the amount of ReplayGain adjustment to whatever amount
  would keep clipping from occurring. Default: ``yes``.

This option only works with the "ffmpeg" backend:

- **peak**: Either ``true`` (the default) or ``sample``. ``true`` is more
  accurate but slower.

Manual Analysis
---------------

By default, the plugin will analyze all items an albums as they are implemented.
However, you can also manually analyze files that are already in your library.
Use the ``beet replaygain`` command:

::

    $ beet replaygain [-Waf] [QUERY]

The ``-a`` flag analyzes whole albums instead of individual tracks. Provide a
query (see :doc:`/reference/query`) to indicate which items or albums to
analyze. Files that already have ReplayGain values are skipped unless ``-f`` is
supplied. Use ``-w`` (write tags) or ``-W`` (don't write tags) to control
whether ReplayGain tags are written into the music files, or stored in the beets
database only (the default is to use :ref:`the importer's configuration
<config-import-write>`).

To execute with a different number of threads, call ``beet replaygain --threads
N``:

::

    $ beet replaygain --threads N [-Waf] [QUERY]

with N any integer. To disable parallelism, use ``--threads 0``.

ReplayGain analysis is not fast, so you may want to disable it during import.
Use the ``auto`` config option to control this:

::

    replaygain:
        auto: no

Commit message:

Add mp3rgain support to ReplayGain command backend
mp3rgain is a modern Rust rewrite of mp3gain that provides:
- CLI-compatible drop-in replacement for mp3gain
- Support for both MP3 and AAC/M4A formats (like aacgain)
- Fixes for CVE-2021-34085 (Critical, CVSS 9.8) and CVE-2019-18359 (Medium)
- Memory-safe implementation in Rust
- Works on modern systems (Windows 11, macOS Apple Silicon)

Changes:
- Add mp3rgain to the command search list (prioritized first)
- Update format_supported() with more robust command name detection
  using os.path.basename() and startswith() instead of substring matching
- Update documentation with installation instructions

See: https://github.com/M-Igashi/mp3rgain

docs/plugins/replaygain.rst, after:

ReplayGain Plugin
=================

This plugin adds support for ReplayGain_, a technique for normalizing audio
playback levels.

.. _replaygain: https://wiki.hydrogenaudio.org/index.php?title=ReplayGain

Installation
------------

This plugin can use one of many backends to compute the ReplayGain values:
GStreamer, mp3gain (and its cousins, aacgain and mp3rgain), Python Audio Tools
or ffmpeg. ffmpeg and mp3gain can be easier to install. mp3gain supports fewer
audio formats than the other backends.

Once installed, this plugin analyzes all files during the import process. This
can be a slow process; to instead analyze after the fact, disable automatic
analysis and use the ``beet replaygain`` command (see below).

To speed up analysis with some of the available backends, this plugin processes
tracks or albums (when using the ``-a`` option) in parallel. By default, a
single thread is used per logical core of your CPU.

GStreamer
~~~~~~~~~

To use GStreamer_ for ReplayGain analysis, you will of course need to install
GStreamer and plugins for compatibility with your audio files. You will need at
least GStreamer 1.0 and `PyGObject 3.x`_ (a.k.a. ``python-gi``).

.. _gstreamer: https://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/

.. _pygobject 3.x: https://pygobject.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

Then, install ``beets`` with ``replaygain`` extra which installs ``GStreamer``
bindings for Python

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install "beets[replaygain]"

Lastly, enable the ``replaygain`` plugin in your configuration (see
:ref:`using-plugins`) and specify the GStreamer backend by adding this to your
configuration file:

::

    replaygain:
        backend: gstreamer

The GStreamer backend does not support parallel analysis.

mp3gain, aacgain, and mp3rgain
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to use this backend, you will need to install the mp3gain_ command-line
tool, the aacgain_ fork, or mp3rgain_. Here are some hints:

- On Mac OS X, you can use Homebrew_. Type ``brew install aacgain`` or
  ``brew install mp3rgain``.
- On Linux, mp3gain_ is probably in your repositories. On Debian or Ubuntu, for
  example, you can run ``apt-get install mp3gain``. Alternatively, mp3rgain is
  available via Nix (``nix-env -iA nixpkgs.mp3rgain``) or AUR for Arch Linux.
- On Windows, download and install mp3rgain_ (recommended) or the original
  mp3gain_.

mp3rgain_ is a modern Rust rewrite of mp3gain that also supports AAC/M4A files.
It addresses security vulnerabilities (CVE-2021-34085, CVE-2019-18359) present
in the original mp3gain and works on modern systems including Windows 11 and
macOS with Apple Silicon.

.. _aacgain: https://aacgain.altosdesign.com

.. _homebrew: https://brew.sh

.. _mp3gain: http://mp3gain.sourceforge.net/download.php

.. _mp3rgain: https://github.com/M-Igashi/mp3rgain

Then, enable the plugin (see :ref:`using-plugins`) and specify the "command"
backend in your configuration file:

::

    replaygain:
        backend: command

If beets doesn't automatically find the ``mp3gain`` or ``aacgain`` executable,
you can configure the path explicitly like so:

::

    replaygain:
        command: /Applications/MacMP3Gain.app/Contents/Resources/aacgain

Python Audio Tools
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This backend uses the `Python Audio Tools`_ package to compute ReplayGain for a
range of different file formats. The package is not available via PyPI; it must
be installed manually (only versions preceding 3.x are compatible).

On OS X, most of the dependencies can be installed with Homebrew_:

::

    brew install mpg123 mp3gain vorbisgain faad2 libvorbis

The Python Audio Tools backend does not support parallel analysis.

.. _python audio tools: http://audiotools.sourceforge.net

ffmpeg
~~~~~~

This backend uses ffmpeg to calculate EBU R128 gain values. To use it, install
the ffmpeg_ command-line tool and select the ``ffmpeg`` backend in your config
file.

.. _ffmpeg: https://ffmpeg.org

Configuration
-------------

To configure the plugin, make a ``replaygain:`` section in your configuration
file. The available options are:

- **auto**: Enable ReplayGain analysis during import. Default: ``yes``.
- **threads**: The number of parallel threads to run the analysis in. Overridden
  by ``--threads`` at the command line. Default: # of logical CPU cores
- **parallel_on_import**: Whether to enable parallel analysis during import. As
  of now this ReplayGain data is not written to files properly, so this option
  is disabled by default. If you wish to enable it, remember to run ``beet
  write`` after importing to actually write to the imported files. Default:
  ``no``
- **backend**: The analysis backend; either ``gstreamer``, ``command``,
  ``audiotools`` or ``ffmpeg``. Default: ``command``.
- **overwrite**: On import, re-analyze files that already have ReplayGain tags.
  Note that, for historical reasons, the name of this option is somewhat
  unfortunate: It does not decide whether tags are written to the files (which
  is controlled by the :ref:`import.write <config-import-write>` option).
  Default: ``no``.
- **targetlevel**: A number of decibels for the target loudness level for files
  using ``REPLAYGAIN_`` tags. Default: ``89``.
- **r128_targetlevel**: The target loudness level in decibels (i.e. ``<loudness
  in LUFS> + 107``) for files using ``R128_`` tags. Default: 84 (Use ``83`` for
  ATSC A/85, ``84`` for EBU R128 or ``89`` for ReplayGain 2.0.)
- **r128**: A space separated list of formats that will use ``R128_`` tags with
  integer values instead of the common ``REPLAYGAIN_`` tags with floating point
  values. Requires the "ffmpeg" backend. Default: ``Opus``.
- **per_disc**: Calculate album ReplayGain on disc level instead of album level.
  Default: ``no``

These options only work with the "command" backend:

- **command**: The path to the ``mp3rgain``, ``mp3gain``, or ``aacgain``
  executable (if beets cannot find it by itself). For example:
  ``/Applications/MacMP3Gain.app/Contents/Resources/aacgain``. Default: Search
  in your ``$PATH``.
- **noclip**: Reduce the amount of ReplayGain adjustment to whatever amount
  would keep clipping from occurring. Default: ``yes``.

This option only works with the "ffmpeg" backend:

- **peak**: Either ``true`` (the default) or ``sample``. ``true`` is more
  accurate but slower.

Manual Analysis
---------------

By default, the plugin will analyze all items an albums as they are implemented.
However, you can also manually analyze files that are already in your library.
Use the ``beet replaygain`` command:

::

    $ beet replaygain [-Waf] [QUERY]

The ``-a`` flag analyzes whole albums instead of individual tracks. Provide a
query (see :doc:`/reference/query`) to indicate which items or albums to
analyze. Files that already have ReplayGain values are skipped unless ``-f`` is
supplied. Use ``-w`` (write tags) or ``-W`` (don't write tags) to control
whether ReplayGain tags are written into the music files, or stored in the beets
database only (the default is to use :ref:`the importer's configuration
<config-import-write>`).

To execute with a different number of threads, call ``beet replaygain --threads
N``:

::

    $ beet replaygain --threads N [-Waf] [QUERY]

with N any integer. To disable parallelism, use ``--threads 0``.

ReplayGain analysis is not fast, so you may want to disable it during import.
Use the ``auto`` config option to control this:

::

    replaygain:
        auto: no
