docs/plugins/spotify.rst, before:

Spotify Plugin
==============

The ``spotify`` plugin generates Spotify_ playlists from tracks in your library
with the ``beet spotify`` command using the `Spotify Search API`_.

Also, the plugin can use the Spotify Album_ and Track_ APIs to provide metadata
matches for the importer.

.. _album: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/#/operations/get-an-album

.. _spotify: https://www.spotify.com/

.. _spotify search api: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/#/operations/search

.. _track: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/#/operations/get-track

Why Use This Plugin?
--------------------

- You're a Beets user and Spotify user already.
- You have playlists or albums you'd like to make available in Spotify from
  Beets without having to search for each artist/album/track.
- You want to check which tracks in your library are available on Spotify.
- You want to autotag music with metadata from the Spotify API.
- You want to obtain track popularity and audio features (e.g., danceability)

Basic Usage
-----------

First, enable the ``spotify`` plugin (see :ref:`using-plugins`). Then, use the
``spotify`` command with a beets query:

::

    beet spotify [OPTIONS...] QUERY

Here's an example:

::

    $ beet spotify "In The Lonely Hour"
    Processing 14 tracks...
    https://open.spotify.com/track/19w0OHr8SiZzRhjpnjctJ4
    https://open.spotify.com/track/3PRLM4FzhplXfySa4B7bxS
    [...]

Command-line options include:

- ``-m MODE`` or ``--mode=MODE`` where ``MODE`` is either "list" or "open"
  controls whether to print out the playlist (for copying and pasting) or open
  it in the Spotify app. (See below.)
- ``--show-failures`` or ``-f``: List the tracks that did not match a Spotify
  ID.

You can enter the URL for an album or song on Spotify at the ``enter Id`` prompt
during import:

::

    Enter search, enter Id, aBort, eDit, edit Candidates, plaY? i
    Enter release ID: https://open.spotify.com/album/2rFYTHFBLQN3AYlrymBPPA

Configuration
-------------

This plugin can be configured like other metadata source plugins as described in
:ref:`metadata-source-plugin-configuration`. In addition, the following
configuration options are provided.

The default options should work as-is, but there are some options you can put in
config.yaml under the ``spotify:`` section:

- **mode**: One of the following:

      - ``list``: Print out the playlist as a list of links. This list can then
        be pasted in to a new or existing Spotify playlist.
      - ``open``: This mode actually sends a link to your default browser with
        instructions to open Spotify with the playlist you created. Until this
        has been tested on all platforms, it will remain optional.

  Default: ``list``.

- **region_filter**: A two-character country abbreviation, to limit results to
  that market. Default: None.
- **show_failures**: List each lookup that does not return a Spotify ID (and
  therefore cannot be added to a playlist). Default: ``no``.
- **tiebreak**: How to choose the track if there is more than one identical
  result. For example, there might be multiple releases of the same album. The
  options are ``popularity`` and ``first`` (to just choose the first match
  returned). Default: ``popularity``.
- **regex**: An array of regex transformations to perform on the
  track/album/artist fields before sending them to Spotify. Can be useful for
  changing certain abbreviations, like ft. -> feat. See the examples below.
  Default: None.
- **search_query_ascii**: If set to ``yes``, the search query will be converted
  to ASCII before being sent to Spotify. Converting searches to ASCII can
  enhance search results in some cases, but in general, it is not recommended.
  For instance ``artist:deadmau5 album:4×4`` will be converted to
  ``artist:deadmau5 album:4x4`` (notice ``×!=x``). Default: ``no``.

Here's an example:

::

    spotify:
        source_weight: 0.7
        mode: open
        region_filter: US
        show_failures: on
        tiebreak: first
        search_query_ascii: no

        regex: [
            {
                field: "albumartist", # Field in the item object to regex.
                search: "Something", # String to look for.
                replace: "Replaced" # Replacement value.
            },
            {
                field: "title",
                search: "Something Else",
                replace: "AlsoReplaced"
            }
        ]

Obtaining Track Popularity and Audio Features from Spotify
----------------------------------------------------------

Spotify provides information on track popularity_ and audio features_ that can
be used for music discovery.

.. _features: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/#/operations/get-audio-features

.. _popularity: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/#/operations/get-track

The ``spotify`` plugin provides an additional command ``spotifysync`` to obtain
these track attributes from Spotify:

- ``beet spotifysync [-f]``: obtain popularity and audio features information
  for every track in the library. By default, ``spotifysync`` will skip tracks
  that already have this information populated. Using the ``-f`` or ``-force``
  option will download the data even for tracks that already have it. Please
  note that ``spotifysync`` works on tracks that have the Spotify track
  identifiers. So run ``spotifysync`` only after importing your music, during
  which Spotify identifiers will be added for tracks where Spotify is chosen as
  the tag source.

  In addition to ``popularity``, the command currently sets these audio features
  for all tracks with a Spotify track ID:

  - ``acousticness``
  - ``danceability``
  - ``energy``
  - ``instrumentalness``
  - ``key``
  - ``liveness``
  - ``loudness``
  - ``mode``
  - ``speechiness``
  - ``tempo``
  - ``time_signature``
  - ``valence``

Commit message:

Add configurable search_limit to Spotify and Deezer plugins

docs/plugins/spotify.rst, after:

Spotify Plugin
==============

The ``spotify`` plugin generates Spotify_ playlists from tracks in your library
with the ``beet spotify`` command using the `Spotify Search API`_.

Also, the plugin can use the Spotify Album_ and Track_ APIs to provide metadata
matches for the importer.

.. _album: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/#/operations/get-an-album

.. _spotify: https://www.spotify.com/

.. _spotify search api: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/#/operations/search

.. _track: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/#/operations/get-track

Why Use This Plugin?
--------------------

- You're a Beets user and Spotify user already.
- You have playlists or albums you'd like to make available in Spotify from
  Beets without having to search for each artist/album/track.
- You want to check which tracks in your library are available on Spotify.
- You want to autotag music with metadata from the Spotify API.
- You want to obtain track popularity and audio features (e.g., danceability)

Basic Usage
-----------

First, enable the ``spotify`` plugin (see :ref:`using-plugins`). Then, use the
``spotify`` command with a beets query:

::

    beet spotify [OPTIONS...] QUERY

Here's an example:

::

    $ beet spotify "In The Lonely Hour"
    Processing 14 tracks...
    https://open.spotify.com/track/19w0OHr8SiZzRhjpnjctJ4
    https://open.spotify.com/track/3PRLM4FzhplXfySa4B7bxS
    [...]

Command-line options include:

- ``-m MODE`` or ``--mode=MODE`` where ``MODE`` is either "list" or "open"
  controls whether to print out the playlist (for copying and pasting) or open
  it in the Spotify app. (See below.)
- ``--show-failures`` or ``-f``: List the tracks that did not match a Spotify
  ID.

You can enter the URL for an album or song on Spotify at the ``enter Id`` prompt
during import:

::

    Enter search, enter Id, aBort, eDit, edit Candidates, plaY? i
    Enter release ID: https://open.spotify.com/album/2rFYTHFBLQN3AYlrymBPPA

Configuration
-------------

This plugin can be configured like other metadata source plugins as described in
:ref:`metadata-source-plugin-configuration`. In addition, the following
configuration options are provided.

The default options should work as-is, but there are some options you can put in
config.yaml under the ``spotify:`` section:

- **mode**: One of the following:

      - ``list``: Print out the playlist as a list of links. This list can then
        be pasted in to a new or existing Spotify playlist.
      - ``open``: This mode actually sends a link to your default browser with
        instructions to open Spotify with the playlist you created. Until this
        has been tested on all platforms, it will remain optional.

  Default: ``list``.

- **region_filter**: A two-character country abbreviation, to limit results to
  that market. Default: None.
- **show_failures**: List each lookup that does not return a Spotify ID (and
  therefore cannot be added to a playlist). Default: ``no``.
- **tiebreak**: How to choose the track if there is more than one identical
  result. For example, there might be multiple releases of the same album. The
  options are ``popularity`` and ``first`` (to just choose the first match
  returned). Default: ``popularity``.
- **regex**: An array of regex transformations to perform on the
  track/album/artist fields before sending them to Spotify. Can be useful for
  changing certain abbreviations, like ft. -> feat. See the examples below.
  Default: None.
- **search_query_ascii**: If set to ``yes``, the search query will be converted
  to ASCII before being sent to Spotify. Converting searches to ASCII can
  enhance search results in some cases, but in general, it is not recommended.
  For instance ``artist:deadmau5 album:4×4`` will be converted to
  ``artist:deadmau5 album:4x4`` (notice ``×!=x``). Default: ``no``.
- **search_limit**: The maximum number of results to return from Spotify for
  each search query. Default: ``5``.

Here's an example:

::

    spotify:
        source_weight: 0.7
        mode: open
        region_filter: US
        show_failures: on
        tiebreak: first
        search_query_ascii: no

        regex: [
            {
                field: "albumartist", # Field in the item object to regex.
                search: "Something", # String to look for.
                replace: "Replaced" # Replacement value.
            },
            {
                field: "title",
                search: "Something Else",
                replace: "AlsoReplaced"
            }
        ]

Obtaining Track Popularity and Audio Features from Spotify
----------------------------------------------------------

Spotify provides information on track popularity_ and audio features_ that can
be used for music discovery.

.. _features: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/#/operations/get-audio-features

.. _popularity: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/#/operations/get-track

The ``spotify`` plugin provides an additional command ``spotifysync`` to obtain
these track attributes from Spotify:

- ``beet spotifysync [-f]``: obtain popularity and audio features information
  for every track in the library. By default, ``spotifysync`` will skip tracks
  that already have this information populated. Using the ``-f`` or ``-force``
  option will download the data even for tracks that already have it. Please
  note that ``spotifysync`` works on tracks that have the Spotify track
  identifiers. So run ``spotifysync`` only after importing your music, during
  which Spotify identifiers will be added for tracks where Spotify is chosen as
  the tag source.

  In addition to ``popularity``, the command currently sets these audio features
  for all tracks with a Spotify track ID:

  - ``acousticness``
  - ``danceability``
  - ``energy``
  - ``instrumentalness``
  - ``key``
  - ``liveness``
  - ``loudness``
  - ``mode``
  - ``speechiness``
  - ``tempo``
  - ``time_signature``
  - ``valence``
