docs/plugins/zero.rst, before:

Zero Plugin
===========

The ``zero`` plugin allows you to null fields in files' metadata tags. Fields
can be nulled unconditionally or conditioned on a pattern match. For example,
the plugin can strip useless comments like "ripped by MyGreatRipper."

The plugin can work in one of two modes:

- ``fields``: A blacklist, where you choose the tags you want to remove (used by
  default).
- ``keep_fields``: A whitelist, where you instead specify the tags you want to
  keep.

To use the ``zero`` plugin, enable the plugin in your configuration (see
:ref:`using-plugins`).

Configuration
-------------

Make a ``zero:`` section in your configuration file. You can specify the fields
to nullify and the conditions for nullifying them:

- Set ``auto`` to ``yes`` to null fields automatically on import. Default:
  ``yes``.
- Set ``fields`` to a whitespace-separated list of fields to remove. You can get
  the list of all available fields by running ``beet fields``. In addition, the
  ``images`` field allows you to remove any images embedded in the media file.
- Set ``keep_fields`` to *invert* the logic of the plugin. Only these fields
  will be kept; other fields will be removed. Remember to set only ``fields`` or
  ``keep_fields``---not both!
- To conditionally filter a field, use ``field: [regexp, regexp]`` to specify
  regular expressions.
- By default this plugin only affects files' tags; the beets database is left
  unchanged. To update the tags in the database, set the ``update_database``
  option to true.

For example:

::

    zero:
        fields: month day genre genres comments
        comments: [EAC, LAME, from.+collection, 'ripped by']
        genre: [rnb, 'power metal']
        genres: [rnb, 'power metal']
        update_database: true

If a custom pattern is not defined for a given field, the field will be nulled
unconditionally.

Note that the plugin currently does not zero fields when importing "as-is".

Manually Triggering Zero
------------------------

You can also type ``beet zero [QUERY]`` to manually invoke the plugin on music
in your library.

Preserving Album Art
--------------------

If you use the ``keep_fields`` option, the plugin will remove embedded album art
from files' tags unless you tell it not to. To keep the album art, include the
special field ``images`` in the list. For example:

::

    zero:
        keep_fields: title artist album year track genre genres images

Commit message:

Adds a zero_disc_if_single_disc to the zero plugin
Adds a zero_disc_number_if_single_disc boolean to the zero plugin for writing to files. Adds the logic that, if disctotal is set and there is only one disc in disctotal, that the disc is not set.

This keeps tags cleaner, only using disc on multi-disc albums. The disctotal is not touched, particularly as this is not usually displayed in most clients.

The field is removed only for writing the tags, but the disc number is maintained in the database to avoid breaking anything that may depend on a disc number or avoid possible loops or failed logic.

docs/plugins/zero.rst, after:

Zero Plugin
===========

The ``zero`` plugin allows you to null fields in files' metadata tags. Fields
can be nulled unconditionally or conditioned on a pattern match. For example,
the plugin can strip useless comments like "ripped by MyGreatRipper."

The plugin can work in one of two modes:

- ``fields``: A blacklist, where you choose the tags you want to remove (used by
  default).
- ``keep_fields``: A whitelist, where you instead specify the tags you want to
  keep.

To use the ``zero`` plugin, enable the plugin in your configuration (see
:ref:`using-plugins`).

Configuration
-------------

Make a ``zero:`` section in your configuration file. You can specify the fields
to nullify and the conditions for nullifying them:

- Set ``auto`` to ``yes`` to null fields automatically on import. Default:
  ``yes``.
- Set ``fields`` to a whitespace-separated list of fields to remove. You can get
  the list of all available fields by running ``beet fields``. In addition, the
  ``images`` field allows you to remove any images embedded in the media file.
- Set ``keep_fields`` to *invert* the logic of the plugin. Only these fields
  will be kept; other fields will be removed. Remember to set only ``fields`` or
  ``keep_fields``---not both!
- To conditionally filter a field, use ``field: [regexp, regexp]`` to specify
  regular expressions.
- Set ``zero_disc_if_single_disc`` to ``True`` to zero the disc number field
  only if the album contains a disctotal count and is a single disc.
- By default this plugin only affects files' tags; the beets database is left
  unchanged. To update the tags in the database, set the ``update_database``
  option to true.

For example:

::

    zero:
        fields: month day genre genres comments
        comments: [EAC, LAME, from.+collection, 'ripped by']
        genre: [rnb, 'power metal']
        genres: [rnb, 'power metal']
        update_database: true

If a custom pattern is not defined for a given field, the field will be nulled
unconditionally.

Note that the plugin currently does not zero fields when importing "as-is".

Manually Triggering Zero
------------------------

You can also type ``beet zero [QUERY]`` to manually invoke the plugin on music
in your library.

Preserving Album Art
--------------------

If you use the ``keep_fields`` option, the plugin will remove embedded album art
from files' tags unless you tell it not to. To keep the album art, include the
special field ``images`` in the list. For example:

::

    zero:
        keep_fields: title artist album year track genre genres images
